# Saccharomyces_cerevisiae_bulk_RNA_seq_analysis
A workflow outlining the steps to analyze bulk transcriptomic data on Saccharomyces cerevisiae

# Introduction
*Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae)*, also known as brewer’s yeast, plays an important role in manufacturing alcoholic drinks such as beer and wine. In the context of wine, flor yeast is a specialized type of S. cerevisiae that forms biofilms/velum on the surface of wine during the winemaking process. There are three biofilm stages: early, thin, and mature which occur in that specific order. In terms of in biomedical research, it is a widely used and well-characterized model organism. In fact, it was one of the first eukaryotic model organisms where RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) has been employed (Nagalakshmi et al., 2008). One of the main goals of RNA-sequencing is to count the complete set of all transcripts in a cell which includes its mRNA, tRNA, and non-coding RNA. Consequently, this allows for further downstream analysis that includes differential gene expression (DEGs) and gene ontology (GO) analysis.

# Methodology
## Obtaining Transcriptome Data and Quality Control
RNA-sequencing data were downloaded from the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/home) using the accession numbers SRR10551657 - SRR10551665. The download files and Salmon analysis bash script code was adapted from the tutorial (https://combine-lab.github.io/salmon/getting_started/). Briefly, the samples were previously sequenced with the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform and generated 6 to 9 million reads that were 50bp in length for each sample (Mardanov et al., 2020). The samples represent three different stages/groups of yeast biofilm formation: early biofilm, thin biofilm, and mature biofilm; with each group having a total of 3 replicates (Table 1). The S. cerevisiae strain S288C reference transcriptome file was downloaded from the NCBI’s database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/GCF_000146045.2/). The S288C strain was used because its genes are well-annotated, well-maintained, and has the most complete assembly out of all strains which will allow for robust downstream gene expression analysis (Engel et al., 2014). Packages such as FastQC, MultiQC, and Salmon were downloaded via Bioconda (Grüning et al., 2018) on Bash terminal. Accurate and quick quality control is a major critical step to determine the quality of the RNA-sequencing reads. Therefore, FastQC v0.12.1 (Andrews, 2010) was employed to check the quality of the sequencing reads. Salmon v1.10.3 (Patro et al., 2017) was utilized to quantify the number of reads with the “-l A flag” for automatic detection of library type and the “--gcbias” flag as recommended by DESeq2’s vignette (Love et al., 2014). To check the quality of the quantification results from Salmon, MultiQC v1.33 (Ewels et al., 2016) was used to quickly assess important summary statistics such as percent of mapped reads and number of mapped reads. Quality control plots from MultiQC and FastQC were visualized using ggplot2 v4.0.2 (Wickham, 2009) in RStudio v4.5.1 (2025-06-13). 

# Results

## Differential Gene Expression Analysis
Gene quantifications were imported intro RStudio. DESeq2 v1.50.2 (Love et al., 2014) package was employed for normalization by the medians of ratios method to obtain comparable gene expression levels between samples. Three pairwise comparisons were examined: early to thin, thin to mature, and early to mature. apeglm v1.32.0 (Zhu et al., 2019) package was employed to increase the accuracy of LFC estimates that have low counts or high variability. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to determine the data structure of each sample. The top 20 DEGs were filtered for p-value <0.05 and the absolute values of LFC of each gene in all three corresponding pairwise comparison were extracted. Key results include volcano plots for DEGs, PCA plot for data structure, and heatmap for the top 20 DEGs. 
